# Misc notes and 🦆 questions/answers

Before we start, time to answer a few questions and do some pondering.

## Domain Specific Language (DSL), internal or external?

I don't want to re-invite a full programming language so internal sounds better. At the same time I don't want to have to meddle with YAML files at all so we may need a mix of the two.

- internal to leverage an existing high-level programming language
- external to generate a YAML file off a high-level definition

See [Domain Specific Language][dsl-fowler] in the first place if needed.

## Async constructs?

I like how things like [Temporal][temporal] manage the state for you and lets you define high level workflows. I have never used such a thing and only have an idea of the theory.

Could we allow such a thing:

```csharp
await Flow.wait(TimeSpan.FromHours(1));
```

Which could be implemented with multiple workflows sharing a state between each others? Or one workflows running every hour? Or one workflow with multiple jobs? Or one workflow with various code path which can be controlled with input parameters (`workflow_dispatch`)?

## State management?

We need a place (or multiple places) for doing state management. I can think of two places inside GitHub:

- Artifacts: global, cannot be mutated (but can be carried over), also a logical workflow cannot be split into other workflows for this to work, limited in size, not free for private repos, retention can introduce amnesia, state is somewhat safe
- Issues/PRs: local (to an issue or a PR), somewhat of a hack (we can hide the state in the description in between `<!-- -->`), can be mutated, free, no retention issue (state can be mutated by people)

## API integration?

Pick an [Octokit][octokit] implementation that makes sense, expose what's needed.

## Language?

We need a language to base the DSL from.

[Octokit][octokit] has 3 main implementations I know off: Ruby, JavaScript and .NET.

- Ruby: I don't know if Ruby can be parsed easily for the external part of the DSL (i.e. the workflow generation). I don't know Ruby well enough either.

  UPDATE: https://github.com/seattlerb/ruby_parser seems to do what we are after.

  **Pros**: Ruby is much more favorable for an internal DSL (the syntax is less verbose)

  **Cons**: I prefer statically typed languages. But I am probable going to write all these things using Visual Studio Code or something similar with subpar IDE support anyway...

- JavaScript: This can be parsed easily with something like [espree][espree] (we do it for instance in [`actions/configure-pages`][configure-pages]).

  **Pros**: Actions speaks JavaScript natively.

  **Cons**: I don't like JavaScript, we still need to handle the packaging of dependencies which is going to be ugly no matter what.

- .NET: I believe we can parse it easily with the [Roslyn SDK][roslyn-sdk].

   **Pros**: I'd rather write C# than JavaScript. The framework probably has a bit more without having to bring in too many ugly dependencies (`TimeSpan`!).

   **Cons**: I am rusty! Just like with JavaScript we need to compile and distribute the whole thing.

## Project API

There is no REST API that I am aware of for working with the new (GA) project...

We need GraphQL client support.

## Run locally

Since we abstract workflows entirely, one big opportunity is to make testing/mocking easier. This needs to be "built-in" as much as possible.

## Examples

### Support escalation

```ruby
require "Date"

# Define name of the workflow
describe("Support escalation") do

  project = "github/pages-engineering"
  triage_column = "On-call Triage"
  blocked_column = "Blocked"

  on_issue |issue| do
    # This needs to be outside of the loop if we want a nicer way to be smart about it
    return unless issue.state == "open"
    return unless issue.labels.include?("support-escalation")

    # Initial state -> Triage column
    if !get_project_column(project, issue)
      set_project_column(project, issue, triage_column)

    # Awaiting customer -> blocked
    on_label("+awaiting_customer_escalation") do
      state.set(issue, "awaiting", DateTime.now)
      set_project_column(project, issue, blocked_column)
    end

    # Blocked -> Triage
    # - When a new reply is posted
    # - Or when the awaiting customer escalation label is removed
    if (label("awaiting_customer_escalation") && state.get(issue, "awaiting") < last_comment(issue).date) || !label("awaiting_customer_escalation")
      set_project_column(project, issue, triage_column)
      label(issue, "-awaiting_customer_escalation")
      state.clear(issue, "awaiting")
    end
  end

end
```


<!-- References -->
[dsl-fowler]: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/DomainSpecificLanguage.html
[temporal]: https://www.temporal.io/
[octokit]: https://github.com/octokit
[roslyn-sdk]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/roslyn-sdk/
[configure-pages]: https://github.com/actions/configure-pages
[espree]: https://github.com/eslint/espree